---
slug: /
---

# What is functional programming

> Functional Programming is programming with pure functions. Mathematical functions.

A quick search on the internet may lead you to the following definition:

> A (pure) function is a procedure that given the same input always return the same output without any observable side-effect.

The term "side effect" does not yet have any specific meaning (we'll see in the future how to give a formal definition), what matters is to have some sort of intuition, think about opening a file or writing into a database.

For the time being we can limit ourselves to say that a side effect is _anything_ a function does besides returning a value.

What is the structure of a program that uses exclusively pure functions?

A functional program tends to be written like a **pipeline**:

```ts
const program = pipe(
  input,
  f1, // pure function
  f2, // pure function
  f3, // pure function
  ...
)
```

What happens here is that `input` is passed to the first function `f1`, which returns a value that is passed to the second function `f2`, which returns a value that is passed as an argument to the third function `f3`, and so on.

**Demo**

[`00_pipe_and_flow.ts`](https://github.com/enricopolanski/functional-programming/blob/master/src/00_pipe_and_flow.ts)

We'll see how functional programming provides us with tools to structure our code in that style.

Other than understanding what functional programming _is_, it is also essential to understand what is it's goal.

Functional programming's goal is to **tame a system's complexity** through the use of formal _models_, and to give careful attention to **code's properties** and refactoring ease.

> Functional programming will help teach people the mathematics behind program construction:
>
> - how to write composable code
> - how to reason about side effects
> - how to write consistent, general, less ad-hoc APIs

What does it mean to give careful attention to code's properties? Let's see with an example:

**Example**

Why can we say that the `Array`'s `map` method is "more functional" than a `for` loop?

```ts
// input
const xs: Array<number> = [1, 2, 3]

// transformation
const double = (n: number): number => n * 2

// result: I want an array where each `xs`' element is doubled
const ys: Array<number> = []
for (let i = 0; i <= xs.length; i++) {
  ys.push(double(xs[i]))
}
```

A `for` loop offers a lot of flexibility, I can modify:

- the starting index, `let i = 0`
- the looping condition, `i < xs.length`
- the step change, `i++`.

This also implies that I may introduce **errors** and that I have no guarantees about the returned value.

**Quiz**. Is the `for loop` correct?

> See the [answer here](quiz-answers/for-loop.md)

Let's rewrite the same exercise using `map`.

```ts
// input
const xs: Array<number> = [1, 2, 3]

// transformation
const double = (n: number): number => n * 2

// result: I want an array where each `xs`' element is doubled
const ys: Array<number> = xs.map(double)
```

We can note how `map` lacks the same flexibility of a `for loop`, but it offers us some guarantees:

- all the elements of the input array will be processed
- the resulting array will always have the same number of elements as the starting one

In functional programming, where there's an emphasis on code properties rather than implementation details, the `map` operation is interesting **due to its limitations**

Think about how easier it is to review a PR that involves `map` rather than a `for` loop.
