# The two pillars of functional programming

Functional programming is based on the following two pillars:

- Referential transparency
- Composition (as universal design pattern)

All of the remaining content derives directly or indirectly from those two points.

## Referential transparency

> **Definition**. An **expression** is said to be _referentially transparent_ if it can be replaced with its corresponding value without changing the program's behavior

**Example** (referential transparency implies the use of pure functions)

```ts
const double = (n: number): number => n * 2

const x = double(2)
const y = double(2)
```

The expression `double(2)` has the referential transparency property because it is replaceable with its value, the number 4.

Thus I can proceed with the following refactor

```ts
const x = 4
const y = x
```

Not every expression is referentially transparent, let's see an example.

**Example** (referential transparency implies not throwing exceptions)

```ts
const inverse = (n: number): number => {
  if (n === 0) throw new Error('cannot divide by zero')
  return 1 / n
}

const x = inverse(0) + 1
```

I can't replace `inverse(0)` with its value, thus it is not referentially transparent.

**Example** (referential transparency requires the use of immutable data structures)

```ts
const xs = [1, 2, 3]

const append = (xs: Array<number>): void => {
  xs.push(4)
}

append(xs)

const ys = xs
```

On the last line I cannot replace `xs` with its initial value `[1, 2, 3]` since it has been changed by calling `append`.

Why is referential transparency so important? Because it allows us to:

- **reason about code locally**, there is no need to know external context in order to understand a fragment of code
- **refactor** without changing our system's behaviour

**Quiz**. Suppose we have the following program:

```ts
// In TypeScript `declare` allows to introduce a definition without requiring an implementation
declare const question: (message: string) => Promise<string>

const x = await question('What is your name?')
const y = await question('What is your name?')
```

Can I refactor in this way? Does the program's behavior change or is it going to change?

```ts
const x = await question('What is your name?')
const y = x
```

The answer is: there's no way to know without reading `question`'s _implementation_.

As you can see, refactoring a program including non-referentially transparent expressions might be challenging.
In functional programming, where every expression is referentially transparent, the cognitive load required to make changes is severely reduced.

## Composition

Functional programming's fundamental pattern is _composition_: we compose small units of code accomplishing very specific tasks into larger and complex units.

An example of a "from the smallest to the largest" composition pattern we can think of:

- composing two or more primitive values (numbers or strings)
- composing two or more functions
- composing entire programs

In the very last example we can speak of _modular programming_:

> By modular programming I mean the process of building large programs by gluing together smaller programs - Simon Peyton Jones

This programming style is achievable through the use of combinators.

The term **combinator** refers to the [combinator pattern](https://wiki.haskell.org/Combinator):

> A style of organizing libraries centered around the idea of combining things. Usually there is some type `T`, some "primitive" values of type `T`, and some "combinators" which can combine values of type `T` in various ways to build up more complex values of type `T`

The general concept of a combinator is rather vague and it can appear in different forms, but the simplest one is this:

```ts
combinator: Thing -> Thing
```

**Example**. The function `double` combines two numbers.

The goal of a combinator is to create new *Thing*s from *Thing*s already defined.

Since the output of a combinator, the new _Thing_, can be passed around as input to other programs and combinators, we obtain a combinatorial explosion of opportunities, which makes this pattern extremely powerful.

**Example**

```ts
import { pipe } from 'fp-ts/function'

const double = (n: number): number => n * 2

console.log(pipe(2, double, double, double)) // => 16
```

Thus the usual design you can find in a functional module is:

- a model for some type `T`
- a small set of "primitives" of type `T`
- a set of combinators to combine the primitives in larger structures

Let's try to implement such a module:

**Demo**

[`01_retry.ts`](https://github.com/wwmmzz/functional-programming/blob/master/src/01_retry.ts)

As you can see from the previous demo, with merely 3 primitives and two combinators we've been able to express a pretty complex policy.

Think at how just adding a single new primitive, or a single combinator to those already defined, adds expressive possibilities exponentially.

Of the two combinators in `01_retry.ts` a special mention goes to `concat` since it refers to a very powerful functional programming abstraction: semigroups.
